# WNBA Women's Health-Informed Betting
### By: David Zhong

## Description
Automated system predicting WNBA player performance by analyzing historical points and menstrual/cyclical patterns, generating betting picks, and storing results in a database.

## Disclaimer
**THE SUBJECT MATTER OF THIS PROJECT INVOLVES CONCEPTS THAT ARE POTENTIALLY UNETHICAL, INVASIVE, AND POTENTIALLY INAPPROPRIATE.**
**THERE IS CURRENTLY NO DEFINITIVE OR UNIVERSALLY ACCEPTED SCIENTIFIC CONCLUSION ESTABLISHING A CLEAR CORRELATION BETWEEN BASKETBALL PERFORMANCE AND THE PHASES OF THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE.**
**THIS PROJECT IS PRESENTED SOLELY AS AN ACADEMIC EXPLORATION AND SHOULD NOT BE INTERPRETED AS ENDORSING, SUPPORTING, OR PROMOTING ANY SUCH PRACTICES.**

This project operates on the simplifying assumption that performance may decrease during menstruation. This is a potentially harmful stereotype that is not supported by credible scientific consensus. In fact, some research indicates that performance may improve during the late follicular phase of the menstrual cycle (see [Article 1](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38059487/), [Article 2](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10047984/)). Any patterns observed in this project should therefore be understood as artifacts of the modeling exercise, not reflections of real player physiology. Perhaps an extension of the project could be to test the opposite; instead of predicting the lows, perhaps it is more supported to predict the highs.

## Aim of the Project
To explore whether advanced AI models can identify meaningful patterns and generate potentially useful insights from speculative theories about player performance. As someone interested in data analysis and sports betting (while also aiming to highlight, promote, and engage with women’s sport), I am testing how these tools perform when applied to complex and less-studied areas.

## What I Learned (So Far)
- This is most likely not profitable.
- There is no clear correlation between the menstrual cycle and basketball performance.
- Some players may not even menstruate.
- Leveraging AI is as useful as a coin-flip.

## GitHub Actions
- 10 AM EST (TODAY): Today's WNBA player point props (the player over/under lines and odds) are scraped from [ScoresAndOdds.com](https://www.scoresandodds.com/wnba/props), and recorded in props.json.
- 11 AM EST (TODAY): Various AI generated prediction models will try and determine whether the player will score over or under the line set by the books. Their bet (over/under), performance note, and bet amount will be recorded along with the date, player name, model name, predicted points, actual points, over line, under line, over odds, and under odds.
- 7 AM EST (NEXT DAY): Last night's WNBA player statistics are downloaded from the [SportsDataVerse wehoop WNBA data GitHub repository](https://github.com/sportsdataverse/wehoop-wnba-data).
- 8 AM EST (NEXT DAY): Python script goes through the playerbox, updating the player's points scored, team name, and updating fields such as result (won/lost), points differential (actual - predicted), and profit (+/-).


### Models
1. model_CL1 is generated by Claude Sonnet 4. The prompt is simply to focus on pattern recognition; with yearly playerbox data, go through each month and try to recognize repeated dips in point production at a similar time per month. The model tries to determine what type of game (very bad game, good game, average game, etc) the player would have today. This model is unable to generate wager amounts.
2. model_CL2 is generated by Claude Sonnet 4. The prompt is again, to focus on pattern recognition, but instead of just analyzing points, also analyze field goal percentage over each game from every year.
3. model_CL3_LEARN is generated by Claude Sonnet 4. The prompt is for this model to analyze the previously placed bets made by model_CL1 and model_CL2, and start to learn about player tendencies. For example, I've noticed that again and again, the models seem to underestimate and always bet the under on Las Vegas Aces' star player A'ja Wilson. This model will attempt to learn off of previous predictions, and start to bet more in favour of the over instead of the under and vice-versa for some players. It will also do forceful overs for some players, again, using A'ja Wilson as an example. As of writing, if you bet the over on A'ja Wilson 8 times in a row, 7 out of the total 8 bets would win. The same could be said for Sabrina Ionescu; if you bet the under 7 times in a row, 7 out of the total 7 bets would win.
4. model_CH1_LEARN is generated by ChatGPT 5. The prompt is the same as for model_CL3_LEARN, which is to learn off the previous placed bets on all players. I've noticed this model has 2-3 times more lines of code than the other models, and is very math based.

The pattern recognition component of the models is to load all of the player's historical points data, and weigh each season by recenecy, with the closest-to-present seasons weighted heavier than earlier seasons the player has played. With the season data, the models will go through every single month, attempt to analyze the points trend, and see if a pattern occurs every month. For example, studies have suggested that the late follicular phase could boost player performance. Therefore, if the model detects a high points performance (late follicular phase) followed by a potential decrease in production (luteal phase), and this pattern exists at around the same time frame next month, then the model will identify this trend, and apply a prediction for the future game based off of the recognized pattern.


## Technologies
- Python
- Pandas
- PostgreSQL (Supabase)
- SQLAlchemy
- BeautifulSoup
- Streamlit
- GitHub Actions

## Future Features
- Imagine you placed $1 on every bet placed. How much profit would you make?
- Launch models to investigate the opposite. Investigate and predict the correlation between higher points and the late follicular phase.
- Have other variables affect the model's predictions, such as the book odds, opponent strength, home/away, etc.
- Potentially use mathematical models instead of pattern recognition based models to compare model strength.
